What is exciting about academia right now is that there is a new field emerging
-- Web Science (encapsulated by Informatics/CS).

The reason why I hone in on "Web Science" as an exciting field is that these
datasets are fricken huge and can't be loaded into STATA or R. And the people
who want to study these datasets are primarily social scientists who have for
most of their academic and professional careers have been told
SPSS/Excel/R/Stata are the ways to analyze data. How are these trained
sociologists, political scientists, journalists, economists, and communication
scholars supposed to apply their questions to large (Very large) data that
makes these programs crash?
<!-- more -->

Coming from an interdisciplinary program and working with these people over the
past couple of years, I've seen a wide range of technologies used for quant
data analysis: STATA, Excel, and R are most common; followed up in the rear by
Python-hackers and SPSS people, who land on either side of the
technologically-inclined spectrum.

Some, but not many, use python for their data analysis.  Even
"\_\_\_-Informatics" types (those who often have CS/physics degrees) will use
python for their simulation, data collection (scraping) and manipulation, but
they still then output that data to csv for plotting in their favorite
statistics platform. Wouldn't it be great to remove this intermediate step?

Something to remember: academics have no time. It's not that they don't have it
"between the ears" -- rather, it is they are only willing to learn new
technologies that do something they can't do already. In the social sciences,
our users are STATA and R users who have "Big Data" where Big Data means it
crashes R and STATA when they load it.

The problem is, things are (everything is) generally slow in academia. They are
still teaching STATA and R, and maybe one Web Scraping class taught in python
if you're lucky.

Maybe we'll see people adopting python for data analysis -- right? But because
academics have no time and many of them are learning and know STATA/Excel/R,
it's just easier for them to do as little as they can in python, output a csv,
and load it into these other tools. Many of them don't want to spend the time
learning a whole new way of analyzing data.

A new field is being born, and it is Computation. This new field will sit along
side statistics as an interdisciplinary foundation for analysis, visualization,
and manipulation of data. It will also act as a platform to collect data, as
the ability to scrape the web and create our own websites will become as
commonplace as writing a paper. It's best practices and teaching methodologies
are still being discussed, theorized, brought into reality, and tested. And I
bet the language they'll adopt as the primary foundation will be Python.

Python is easy to use, the syntax is clear, the packages are abundant, and the community is open source (read: free).

It's an exciting time to be a quant.


